# Validation of the Immune Cell Deconvolution methods

## Introduction
Computational immune cell deconvolution methods utilizing gene expression profiling to estimate immune cells in bulk tissues and blood are an appealing alternative to flow cytometry.

## Goals
The main focus of this study is a comprehensive comparison between immune cell deconvolution signatures generated by xCell and Cibersort and corresponding flow cytometry data. 

## Data [1[
Gene expression and flow cytometry data from the publicly available rheumatoid arthritis GSE93777 dataset were used for validation of CIBERSORT and xCell immune cell deconvolution methods. All GSE93777 samples were used in the validation (rheumatoid arthritis patients with or without drug treatment and healthy volunteers). Treated rheumatoid arthritis patients received either methotrexate, infliximab, or tocilizumab in roughly equal parts.
CIBERSORT and xCell deconvolution cell signatures were matched to corresponding/related immune cell subtypes assessed by flow cytometry. 

## Methods
### CIBBERSORT [2]
https://cibersort.stanford.edu/
CIBERSORT deconvolution algorithm provides quantification for 22 immune cell subtypes. It is a widely used tool that requires an input matrix of reference gene expression signatures, collectively used to estimate the relative proportions of each cell type of interest. To deconvolve the mixture, a linear support vector regression (SVR), machine-learning approach is utilized and the resulting immune cell abundance estimates the fraction of immune cell types in a sample. The term fraction is defined for each sample as the sum of values across the 22 cell types with a total of 1, and should reflect the true fraction of cells in the sample of a given type. In this analysis, the CIBERSORT deconvolution method was performed on all 22 immune cell subtypes.

### xCell [3]

## Output
We designed an interactive web-based framework using Rshiny technology providing full access to all anonymized data and visualization material for the deconvolution cell signature and flow cytometry validation described in this article, available here: 
We have designed the Rshiny app for a comprehensive validation of two most popular deconvolution methods xCell and CIBERSORT on publicly available data.
The app could be found here: 
https://minijen.shinyapps.io/Immune_Cell_Deconvolution_Validation/

## References:
1. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE93777
2. Newman, A. M. et al. Robust enumeration of cell subsets from tissue expression profiles. Nat Methods 12, 453-457, doi:10.1038/nmeth.3337 (2015).
3. Aran, D., Hu, Z. & Butte, A. J. xCell: digitally portraying the tissue cellular heterogeneity landscape. Genome Biol 18, 220, doi:10.1186/s13059-017-1349-1 (2017).
